.TH NOSLEEP 1 "July 2026" "nosleep 1.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nosleep \- keep a Mac awake with the lid closed, with an optional auto-off timer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nosleep
.RI [ on | off | status | clean | whitelist | sound | insist | Ns | Nm | Nh | help | version ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nosleep
toggles the macOS
.B pmset disablesleep
setting, which prevents system sleep entirely, including clamshell
(lid-close) sleep, and even on battery power. This is the only mechanism that
keeps long-running work (builds, agents, downloads) alive with the lid shut;
app-level power assertions such as those from caffeinate(8) or Amphetamine
cannot override clamshell sleep on battery.
.PP
With no argument,
.B nosleep
toggles the current state. Each state change prints a colored owl banner:
red for indefinitely on, yellow for on-with-timer, green for normal sleep.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B on
Disable sleep until manually turned off.
.TP
.B off
Restore normal sleep behavior. Cancels any pending timer.
.TP
.BR N s " | " N m " | " N h
Disable sleep for N seconds, minutes, or hours, then restore it
automatically. The auto-off runs from a root background process started
immediately, so no sudo password is needed when it fires. A new duration
replaces any pending timer; timers never stack. Durations longer than
one hour ask for confirmation before taking effect (skipped when not run
interactively).
.TP
.B insist
Enable no-sleep even when the battery is below the 15% cutoff. Combines with
any enable form (bare,
.IR N s/ N m/ N h ,
or clean) and disables the low-battery cutoff for that session, so the run
is held until you turn it off (or the timer expires). Without it, trying to
enable below 15% is refused with a hint to reissue the command plus
.BR insist .
.TP
.B status
Show the current state, including time remaining on a pending timer.
.TP
.B clean
Quit every Dock application except the whitelist, then enable no-sleep
(combine with a duration:
.BR "nosleep 1h clean" ).
Shows the apps it will quit first; individual apps can be deselected, and
(q) aborts without changing anything. Quits are graceful (identical to
Cmd-Q), so unsaved-work dialogs may appear. Menu-bar and background apps
are never touched, nor are Finder and the terminal running the command.
Requires a terminal (refuses to run non-interactively) and requires
.B nosleep whitelist
to have been run at least once. When a timed clean expires only sleep is
restored; quit apps stay quit. Intended to cut power and network use
while the Mac works lid-closed.
.TP
.B whitelist
Manage which apps survive a clean. The list is built from the currently
running Dock applications; to whitelist a new app, launch it first.
Whitelisted apps that are not running are also shown so they can be
removed. Saved to
.IR ~/.config/nosleep/whitelist .
.TP
.BR sound " [" Name | off | on ]
Manage the lid-close chime (laptops only). With no argument, show the
current setting and list the available system sounds.
.B off
silences it,
.B on
restores the default, and a
.I Name
(any sound under /System/Library/Sounds, such as
.IR Submarine )
sets and previews it. Saved to
.IR ~/.config/nosleep/sound .
.PP
The first use of clean/whitelist triggers macOS Automation permission
prompts (System Events for listing apps, then one per app quit); approve
them once. If listing apps fails with a not-authorized error, enable
System Events for your terminal under System Settings > Privacy &
Security > Automation, then fully restart the terminal app; as a last
resort reset the recorded decision with
.B tccutil reset AppleEvents
.I <terminal-bundle-id>
and let macOS prompt again.
.TP
.B help
Show usage.
.TP
.B version
Show the version.
.SH BATTERY CUTOFF
On a laptop, sleep is restored automatically whenever the battery charge
falls below 15%, regardless of whether a timer is set, so an unattended
lid-closed Mac cannot run its battery flat. A detached root process polls
the charge roughly every 30 seconds; it exits (restoring sleep) at the
cutoff or when a timer's deadline passes, whichever comes first. On
desktops without a battery the cutoff never applies. Passing
.B insist
overrides the cutoff for a single session.
.SH LID-CLOSE CHIME
On a laptop, while no-sleep is on, closing the lid plays a short system
sound as audible confirmation that the Mac is being held awake; opening the
lid is silent. It is on by default (the
.I Submarine
sound) and managed with
.BR "nosleep sound" .
The sound is played into the logged-in user's audio session, so it is
audible with the lid shut. While the lid is open it is polled about every
two seconds so the chime is prompt; once closed, polling drops back to the
roughly 30-second cadence, so reopening and re-closing within that window
may not chime. Desktops (no lid) are unaffected.
.SH HOW IT WORKS
State changes call
.BR "sudo pmset -a disablesleep" ,
so you are prompted for your password (subject to normal sudo credential
caching). Whenever sleep is disabled, a detached root process is launched
to watch the deadline (if any) and the battery charge; when either
condition is met it runs
.BR "pmset -a disablesleep 0" .
Because that process is already root, it needs no later authentication and
survives the terminal closing.
.SH WARNINGS
While enabled, the Mac stays fully awake with the lid closed
.B even on battery.
Do not put it in a bag; it will run hot. The 15% battery cutoff limits
how flat it can drain but does not stop it running hot in the meantime.
.B nosleep insist
disables even that cutoff, so use it only while attended or on AC power.
.PP
The
.B disablesleep
setting persists across reboots, but the auto-off timer does not. After a
reboot mid-timer, sleep stays disabled until you run
.BR "nosleep off" .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /tmp/nosleep-timer.pid
PID and deadline (epoch seconds) of the pending auto-off timer.
.TP
.I ~/.config/nosleep/whitelist
Apps that survive a clean, one name per line
(respects
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME ).
.TP
.I ~/.config/nosleep/sound
Lid-close chime setting: a system-sound name, or
.BR off .
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B nosleep 1h
Keep the Mac awake for one hour, lid open or closed.
.TP
.B nosleep status
See whether sleep is disabled and when it will restore.
.TP
.B nosleep 8h clean
Overnight agent run: quit everything but the whitelist, stay awake 8 hours.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pmset (1),
.BR caffeinate (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Wynn Wu (https://github.com/wynnwu/nosleep)
